---
title: "Act V: The Marks of Colonial Ownership"
layout: page
permalink: /act5-ownership.html
banner-featured-image: true
banner-padding: 2em
---

## Burying Slavery

U.S., state and local governments censor what schools can and cannot teach about slavery, which more often than not results in Americans being taught a sanitized and sugarcoated version of the horrors of slavery in the United States. The amount of detail that schools teach about slavery and the Civil War varies greatly school district. Some states in the U.S. South do not teach that the Civil War was caused by battles over the acceptability of slavery, let alone mention the harsher and more violent aspects of slavery in the United States.

How did the United States begin? American Indian peoples – the Indigenous peoples of the United States – were enslaved by the Europeans. According to the book *Stealing America* by Linford Fisher, American Indian peoples had been enslaved by English colonists for a half century by the time that Virginia first received enslaved Africans in 1619 (pg 49). Boston and Charleston became central hubs within this international selling of American Indian peoples.

This business of selling American Indian peoples and stealing their lands increased drastically between 1650 and 1750. Indigenous peoples from across the Americas were sold and traded across the entire Western half of the world. Tituba, the famous character from stories of the Salem witch trials, is often depicted as a Black or African American woman. Instead, she was, in reality, an Indigenous Taino or Arawak woman. She was Indigenous to the Americas.

We are faced with a simple fact that doesn’t get discussed in national conversations about slavery and reparations: *enslaved Indigenous people experienced extremely similar and equally as harsh treatment as the enslaved Africans did*. What are we taught to see and understand? What images do we have?

Enslavement of African peoples into the Americas began in the very early years of 1600 – over a century after enslavement of Indigenous Americans began within global trafficking. Before enslaved Africans were taken away from their land, they were abducted and branded by their European captors. This first print, titled *Branding Slaves*, depicts a white man branding an African woman with a hot iron rod while a few other African women are waiting to be branded as well. This print, illustrated by William Blake, was not based on an eyewitness, but instead was made to add detail to an earlier illustration of a similar scene. After being abducted and branded, enslaved African people were crammed onto ships in order to traffick them to the United States and other places in the western hemisphere.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ant320_01" %}

This second print depicts how nearly 500 enslaved Africans were stowed on a single ship. The diagram depicts the fact that the African slave only had enough room to lay down shoulder to shoulder with one another. A note on the diagram mentions that the shelves that each slave was stowed on only had a height of 2 feet 7 inches above the beams, and far less height below the beams. This seems incredibly cramped. Not only were they cramped, their inability to move freely meant that each person had no choice but to sit in their own bodily waste and fluids. Both of these factors – lack of space and toxicity within that space – led to many enslaved Africans dying before they ever reached the United States.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ant320_02" %}

African peoples were harmed before they arrived on American soil. According to the book *The Delectible Negro* by Vincent Woodard, enslaved Africans were eaten or forced to eat fellow enslaved people by Europeans: “It was common practice in the Caribbean to not only cut off the ears of slaves but to also broil them and make the (other) slaves eat the broiled pieces as a punishment” (pg 46).

When enslaved Africans did reach the United States, they were often immediately taken to be auctioned off to a white “master”. During this process, they were examined. These examinations included potential buyers pulling the mouths of enslaved peoples open to inspect their teeth. They pinched their limbs to test their muscularity. They tested them for injuries.

After these examinations, auctions were held. In rare situations, families of enslaved African peoples were sold together in a group. But most auctioneers would separate families by force. Husbands and wives would be separated. Children would be separated from their parents. Babies would be separated from their mothers. Slave auctions reduced the enslaved from human to mere purchasable product.

Often, when slavery is taught in American schools, the most that is said about what occurred during enslavement is that enslaved Africans were forced to do work on plantations without being paid. This description does not scratch the surface of what truly occurred on plantations during a period titled “chattel slavery”.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ant320_03" %}

Enslaved African peoples were used for hard labor that was extremely taxing on their bodies. When slaves became injured, sick, or tired from this hard labor, they were punished in extreme ways. Slave restraints, such as the ones seen in this print, were used in various ways. The iron collar seen in the print was used when a slave would run away and get caught. The long-spiked ends of the collar were engineered to prevent the wearer from being able to move in between trees and bushes; lowering their ability and probability to run away. Ankle and wrist shackles prevented slaves from running away during transportation from one place to another. The iron mask seen in this print prevents the wearer from talking or eating.

Enslaved African women experienced additional forms of cruelty. They were forced to do physical labor. They were also exploited through reproductive labor. Slave owners would sometimes force enslaved women to breastfeed infants that were not their own, including infants of white families and infants of other enslaved women. They were also forced to reproduce frequently in order to produce more slaves for the slave owner to use for labor. This frequent reproduction led to African women being experimented on by white doctors in order to further their knowledge on gynecology. Enslaved African women faced medical abuse on top of everything else.

Many powerful and significant pieces of history are threatened by those in power in the United States. This includes the powerful photograph titled *The Scourged Back*. This famous image is of an African man named Peter who had escaped his enslavement. The focus of the image is the large amount of scarring seen on his back from being whipped by his overseer. President Donald Trump and his administration have been vocal about pushing for the sanitization of America’s history, particularly about slavery. In 2025, current president Donald Trump was quoted saying: “The Smithsonian is OUT OF CONTROL, where everything discussed is how horrible our Country is, how bad Slavery was, and how unaccomplished the downtrodden have been — Nothing about Success, nothing about Brightness, nothing about the Future”. It is extremely important to keep images like *The Scourged Back* in museums because they show a visual representation of how horrible slavery was.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ant320_04" %}

But we, as the people of the United States, must always look deeper into our history than what is told to us - even *within* the already established stories of slavery. Why are we not able to see the enslavement of American Indians peoples like we see the enslavement of African peoples? Why do political and media conversations about slavery focus on Black and White racial relationships – effectively ignoring Indigenous peoples? Ultimately, are their layers to agendas within the United States to silence certain peoples. In our fights with certain political administrations over the ability to tell the truth, are we helping to further silence what has always been silenced within the colonial project called “America”? 

<p class="blockquote-footer text-end fs-5">Basil Morris</p>

## Thomas Edison: America’s Genius?

Thomas Edison is perhaps the United States’ most famous inventor. He is known to many for creating such wonderful things as the light bulb, the motion picture and the audio playback device. What is less well known is that many of his most famous inventions–including *all* of the ones just mentioned–are either not the first of their type at all, or simply weren’t actually his inventions. Despite this, he is lauded as one of this nation’s greatest innovators, with the Library of Congress describing him as “one of the most famous and prolific inventors of all time” (Congress (2)). On the 250th anniversary of the nation’s founding, this exhibit will examine the true history behind some of his famous inventions and perhaps offer a little insight into the man himself–and perhaps in the process, dispel the narrative that any one man can claim unilateral credit for anything.

Let’s start with the light bulb, likely his most famous invention. While Edison was happy to let the public credit himself and his team at his Menlo Park laboratory for “inventing the light bulb”, the truth is that his was only a refinement on 70 years worth of work from half a dozen men. The first is Alessandro Volta, who invented the voltaic pile in 1799-1800 and helped propagate the practice of electrochemistry without ever being able to properly explain how it worked (D’Acquisto, Conclusion). Then there was Humphry Davy, who used the voltaic pile in 1802 to create the electric arc lamp, which burned too bright too fast (Saunders, Bulbs). This design was improved upon in 1835 by James Bowman Lindsay, who created a copper filament bulb that was dimmer, but still burned out too quickly (Saunders, Bulbs). Another attempt was made in 1840 by Warren de la Rue, who made a bulb that used a coiled platinum filament, but platinum was costly and not economical for everyday use (Saunders, Bulbs).

Then, in 1848, William Staite went back to try and improve the basic arc lamp design, “developing a clockwork mechanism that regulated the movement of the lamps' quick-to-erode carbon rods” (Peterson, Early). This, however, still fell short of the mark, largely due to the cost of the batteries required to power his design (Saunders, Bulbs). Then, in 1860, Joseph Swan (an English chemist) developed a lightbulb that used “carbonized paper filaments in place of those made of platinum” (Peterson, Joseph). By 1878, Swan had developed and obtained a patent for the first vacuum sealed incandescent filament electric lamp, demonstrating it for audiences that and the subsequent year (Peterson, Joseph and Saunders, Joseph). Still, though, the thing could only burn for a few hours at most before fizzling out. Finally, in 1879, Edison and his team improved upon Swan’s design with a platinum filament that required much less current to glow (Peterson, Joseph), but it wasn’t until a few months after his patent was granted that “Edison and his team discovered that a carbonized bamboo filament could burn for more than 1,200 hours” (Peterson, First).

Did you find that ride exhausting? The next one won’t be quite as convoluted, I promise. Now it’s time to talk about the phonograph, “the first audio playback device”. This is how the Library of Congress tells the story of the conception of the phonograph:

{% include feature/blockquote.html text="In 1877, Edison was working on a machine that would transcribe telegraphic messages through indentations on paper tape, which could later be sent over the telegraph repeatedly. This development led Edison to speculate that a telephone message could also be recorded in a similar fashion. He experimented with a diaphragm which had an embossing point and was held against rapidly-moving paraffin paper. The speaking vibrations made indentations in the paper. Edison later changed the paper to a metal cylinder with tin foil wrapped around it. The machine had two diaphragm-and-needle units, one for recording, and one for playback. When one would speak into a mouthpiece, the sound vibrations would be indented onto the cylinder by the recording needle in a vertical (or hill and dale) groove pattern. Edison gave a sketch of the machine to his mechanic, John Kruesi, to build, which Kruesi supposedly did within 30 hours. Edison immediately tested the machine by speaking the nursery rhyme into the mouthpiece, ‘Mary had a little lamb.’ To his amazement, the machine played his words back to him.”" speaker="Library of Congress" %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ant320_11" %}

Question for you, reader: have you ever heard John Kruesi’s name? How about the names listed during our overview of the development of the light bulb? To hear the cultural zeitgeist tell it, it’s no more complicated than “Thomas Edison invented the phonograph”. Will you remember his name tomorrow, having left this exhibit in your fleeting memory? Will the creators of this exhibit remember John Kruesi, builder of the phonograph, in six months time? Perhaps, perhaps not… but we will almost certainly never forget the name of Thomas Edison.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ant320_12" %}

That was a tangent; the phonograph was an earnestly impressive invention, and as far as we know, the moment described at the end of that excerpt from the Library of Congress is the first time a human ever heard a recording. It was a revolutionary achievement. However, Edison was not the first to devise a means by which one could record audio. That honor goes to Édouard-Léon Scott de Martinville, a Parisian printer and bookseller who patented the phonautograph in 1857 (Wright, Recording). “The [phonautograph] consisted of a large horn that collected sound, a stretched membrane that vibrated with the air pressure, and a bristle or stylus attached to that membrane. When someone spoke or sang into the horn, the stylus etched those vibrations onto a sheet of paper or glass coated in soot from a lamp flame, preserving the pattern of the sound waves” (Wright, Recording).

Scott did not devise any means to play back his sound recordings. He was mostly concerned with what sound *looked* like, making sound visible by creating a visual record of the sounds themselves (Wright, Recording). In April 1960, he sang “Au Claire de la Lune” into his machine, and submitted the soot-covered tracing into the Academy of Sciences the following year (Wright, Recording). While his work was interesting, it was ultimately only a visual representation of sound; it wouldn’t be until 2008 that a  “team of audio historians from the First Sounds project and scientists from the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory used high-resolution optical scanning of the soot-marked paper to convert the waveforms into audible sound” (Wright, First). Scott died in 1879, likely never suspecting that his recording would one day be the earliest recording of a human’s voice ever heard by human ears (Wright, First).

Finally, let us discuss the motion picture camera. This one was indeed apparently Thomas Edison’s idea, having conceived of a device in 1888 that would be able to view motion pictures (Ashworth). He obtained a patent for it a year later, calling it a “Kinetoscope”, and then assigned his employee William Kennedy Laurie Dickson–a young Scottish inventor–to actually design and build the thing (Ashworth). Or in laymen’s terms: he had an idea, and then he told Dickson to make it his idea a reality. Dickson and his team would spend the next three years turning the Kinetoscope into a reality, creating the first known film in 1891 and completing the machine in 1893 (Ashworth).

{% include feature/blockquote.html text="It did not project an image, but was rather a peep-hole machine, with tiny images on a thin loop of celluloid film that were illuminated by an Edison lamp.  The film was advanced at a constant speed by a motor, but a rotating shutter was designed to cut off the light between frames.  The viewer looked down through an eyepiece on the top to see the projection." speaker="Dr. William B. Ashworth, Jr." %}

The kinetoscope–as well as the motion picture camera Dickson and his team designed to create films to view it (the kinetograph)–were indeed both paid for with Edison’s money, and that apparently entitled him to take sole credit for the products of his laboratory (Congress (3)). Dickson created dozens of (extremely) short films for Edison, and he even has his own IMDb page. The database credits him–among many other things–for directing and starring in the oldest surviving sound film in 1894 (IMDb, Trivia). Yet despite his undeniable importance in film history, sometime between his retirement in 1911 and his death in 1935, he was more or less completely forgotten in the public eye, and Thomas Edison was now known as the “inventor of the motion picture” (Ashcroft). How often did this happen? How often did Edison claim all the credit for his employees’ work and watch without a word as they left him and drifted back into obscurity?

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ant320_13" %}

The final thing we’ll cover for this exhibit is not an invention claimed by Thomas Edison, but rather one of the rare times he didn’t have the last laugh. During the 1880s and 90s, Thomas Edison was in a race with Nikola Tesla to power the United States with each’s own favored method of current transmission: Edison favored a Direct Current (DC) from a power station, while Tesla favored small Alternating Current (AC) transformers to convert low voltage to high voltage and extend the current far beyond what a DC could manage (Johnson). With Edison backed by financier J.P. Morgan and Tesla backed by engineer and industrialist George Westinghouse, the two battled across the country for lighting supremacy, and one of the most important battlegrounds was the 1893 Chicago World’s Fair (Johnson). Ultimately, it wasn’t much of a fight: while Edison and Morgan’s final offer to light the fair was $554k, Westinghouse and Tesla were able to offer to light it for $399k, and on the 1st of May, 1893, President Grover Cleveland would press a button that lit up the fair with one hundred thousand incandescent lamps powered by Westinghouse’s company (Johnson).

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ant320_14" %}

In the Electricity Building, Nikola Tesla conducted his electricity shows like a magician, and attendees would describe his machines as “Tesla’s Animals” (Johnson). It was the beginning of the end for DC, and with it Edison’s hopes to claim yet another slice of history as his and his alone. Ultimately, it would be J.P. Morgan who would have the last laugh, as he would go on to buy them all out of their patents and companies and eventually claim dominion over the entire country’s electricity grid (Johnson). The fact remains that this is still one instance where Edison *didn’t* come out on top, and boy, was he bitter about it to the end of his days.

You’ve reached the end of this exhibit. Assuming you knew who Thomas Edison was going in, do you feel different about him now? Will you remember the names of William K.L. Dickson, John Kruesi, and Joseph Swan? Should we be celebrating the legacy of Thomas Edison on the 250th anniversary of the United States of America’s founding, or should we be questioning why we aren’t celebrating those whose labor he raised himself up upon? Perhaps we should do both; whether we think he deserves it or not, Edison is an overwhelmingly influential figure in American history who at the very least had ideas that would change the course of science and technology forever. Some food for thought, perhaps.

<p class="blockquote-footer text-end fs-5">Joseph McGeoghegan</p>

{% include feature/button.html text="Next Section - Act VI: Activism &raquo;" link="/act6-activism.html" color="primary" size="lg" centered="true" %}